Now, every organization has
really different experiences
in each of these four stages.
In fact, when I was first doing this
specific research is probably three years
ago or maybe four years ago, I really did
not think I was gonna find a common model.
I mean, I was I did hundreds of
interviews, I had all my notes.
I remember vividly sitting in my dining
room with all this paper all over,
it's kind of like pandemic days.
So I was home and I had just
notes from all these meetings and
I was just trying to make sense of it.
And then I kind of found this one concept
which is not that huge but it just made me
realize, there's actually a way to kind
of make these things work together.
And that, so
I wanna shift into the next section
here which is a concept
called origin stories.
So there's two primary origin stories.
The first is top down, that means simply
that executive leadership was involved,
aware, and
actively supportive of the first release.
And then the other origin story,
the other primary origin story
we just called grassroots.
And I also think about that from
the perspective of leadership,
because individual contributors
are always involved in this work, right?
So it's really about
the involvement of leadership.
So at the grassroots origin story, that
means executive leadership was uninvolved,
unaware, or
unsupportive of that first release.
So let's talk a little bit about
the difference between these two.
In the top down origin story, there's
a tremendous amount of visibility, right?
Some leader or maybe a group of leaders
has looked at this and said, okay,
we want this to be something that we do.
So they are investing,
their putting money, they're putting time,
they're oftentimes dedicating
open positions to these roles.
There's a formal budget, it's set
aside and there's a sanctioned team.
They're saying, you people have this
amount of time to work on this thing.
And a lot of times the scope
is much more broad, right?
A leader's looking at this and saying,
the impact that I need from this system in
order to make this
investment has to be broad.
Cuz it's gonna cost a lot,
it's gonna take a lot, so
I'm expecting a broad impact, right?
The scope tends to be really,
really broad and not as deep and
there's a lot of pressure here to deliver.
Oftentimes, especially in early stages, an
organization either hasn't done a design
system before or they're on their fifth or
sixth attempt and
they've got a bunch of
failures behind them, right?
So that is normal.
And so there's pressure here, right,
when the leadership comes in and they say,
all right, we're gonna do it, but
we're gonna do it right this time,
that's a lot of pressure.
We can contrast that with the grassroots
origin story, which of course means
there's a lot less visibility, right,
leadership's not involved here.
So this is oftentimes one or two folks who
work on a design team or on a product team
somewhere or UX or developer and they just
are frustrated with their own process.
And so they're trying to build something
that will help them do their job better.
And that's actually like
a very kind of innocent,
authentic approach to this work
that I actually really love.
There's oftentimes an informal budget,
maybe their director or their direct
supervisor has said, yeah, it's okay you
can have a little bit of time to do this,
but they're not thinking much of it.
Sometimes these folks are doing
this in the evenings,
they are doing it over their lunch break,
they are coming in early, I mean,
that's literally what
happens in a lot of cases.
And if there's a team at all,
it's unsanctioned,
maybe it's just friends of the person
who's idea was at the beginning.
The scope tends to be really narrow here.
This is where I am solving problems for
my specific role, my discipline.
So if I'm a designer, that means, I'm
gonna build something that works well for
people who do what I do.
And then of course there's
low pressure here,
it's just on their own time oftentimes.
So there isn't somebody asking for
feedback or asking for
an update, asking for scope or
budget reports, that kind of thing.
Now, if you're working on a design system
and you're looking at these lists.
You're probably feeling like I actually
have some of that and some of that and
a little bit of this and
maybe a little over here.
Well, that's actually
quite normal as well.
And that's because the top down and
grassroots origin stories
are two extreme ends of a spectrum for
how a system can come to be.
So most design systems
are gonna mature with some
characteristics of both of these.
I like to think about designs
system origin stories in this way.
So the origin stories about how the
initial version of the system came to be.
So the differences between
a top down stage 1 and
a grassroots stage 1 are gonna
be very noticeable, right?
In the early stages you can clearly tell,
right?
But as the system matures,
the differences become more subtle.
So that by stage 4,
the differences between a top down and
a grassroots design system
are often indistinguishable.
That's the goal, right?
What we need is a balance of
authority leadership saying,
this is the way we work.
I'm gonna fund this, I'm gonna support
the work and value at the grassroots level
individuals feeling, I can't do my
job without this system, right?
That's the balance we need and so
that's what we're going for in stage four.
Now, a top down system is
gonna become more like
a grassroots system as it matures.
And a grassroots system is going to become
more like a top down system as it matures.
But remember these are the extreme pads.
But there's lots of other ways through
this and I've seen quite a few.
This is one that I hear a lot,
where a design system starts out
with a grassroots origin story.
And they do some really cool stuff early
on and the boss of the person doing
the work gets wind of this and says,
my gosh, that's actually really cool.
I think the other maybe designers or
the other Front-Enders or
whatever could benefit from this,
let me take that up to my boss.
So they take it to their boss,
their boss takes it up.
All the sudden there's like this, they
get it, right, they start to see it and
before these teams know it they're
in stage 2 with budgets time.
And they were just working on a side
project and all of a sudden they're being
asked to do all this work and
take this thing to a different level.
And so you kind of see this bump up of
support from leadership and buy in.
And that's totally normal.
And there's lots of other paths, right?
There's no perfect way through this.
What's important is that
point in stage 4 or stage 3,
stage 4 area where you are more mature and
you are offering real value.
Now, there's risky situations as well.
So the risky situation is that
you mature without moving toward
the other origin story.
It's unhealthy for a system to exist
without support from both leadership and
individual contributors.
So the straight line top down
path just along the top here.
That means you're too focused on the
opinions and the direction of leadership,
don't tell your boss I told you this.
[LAUGH] But this is a real thing, right?
In this scenario, you're gonna feel like
you're making progress on the surface.
But the lack of engagement with individual
contributors means, it's gonna be really
difficult for you to build something
teams want to adopt, right?
So, these systems struggle to get out
of stage 2, I would say most commonly.
Because the value of the system
isn't really defined by
the people who are gonna use it.
So this is trying to build a product
without talking to your users.
You can't do that well,
right, you're guessing.
And then the straight line grassroots
path, so along the bottom here, that means
that your system is gonna struggle to find
a valid place inside the organization.
And that's because you
haven't done the work to
demonstrate the value of
the system to leadership.
Without that validation from executives,
the funding and
team sizes needed to reach stages 3 and
4, it's gonna be difficult to find.
And I'll tell you this, if things get
difficult financially for the business and
you're in this straight line grassroots
maturing method, your system's gone,
I guarantee it.
Because it's not connected to money and
so when things get tight,
those people if they are kept will
get moved on to product teams.
Can't tell you how many times I've
had conversations with folks where
that's what happened.
And it's sad because a lot of
times they're doing good work.